# Market-Inflation
Impact of minimum wage increase on market inflation in New Jersey 

## Abstract
This research studies the economic impact of minimum wage increases on inflation and the buying power of low-income households, focusing on the state of New Jersey. The reason behind the study is because of its ongoing discussions regarding the influence and role of wage policies in raising the living standards of the low-income household as well as its potential to drive inflation in essential goods and services. Based on the review of the existing literature, the studies highlight the two-fold impact of minimum wage policies. It improves the financial stability of the low-income earners as well as leading to an increase in the costs of living for the people. The primary objective of this study is to analyze the impact of these economic variables and provide data driven understanding for policymakers.
A comprehensive dataset was used in the study which consists of monthly information of the prices of basic good items (rice, milk, eggs and gasoline), average income, multi-family housing rents, unemployment rate where machine learning methods were applied for the analysis. The XGBoost regressor was used in this study as it is capable of handling complex nonlinear relationships. To ensure robustness, Optuna tuning was deployed to obtain the optimal hyperparameters. and evaluated with metrics such as Mean Absolute Error (MAE), Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE), R-squared, and Min-Max Accuracy. SHAP analysis was also used in this study to assess the feature importance, which provided valuable insights about the contribution of each variable like inflation rates and minimum wage to model predictions.
The results demonstrate that there is no significant relationship between minimum wage increases and the inflationary effects on basic goods. However, the study identifies that there are other factors such as gasoline price and egg price which have impact on the overall inflation of the market. The findings from the study highlight the complex and dynamic relation of the economic variable suggesting that policy makers should consider stabilizing prices of basic goods which play a crucial role in overall inflation than wage adjustments. In addition, the study highlights that economic relationships observed at the national level may not be significant at the state level, emphasizing the importance of tailoring policies based on specific regional areas.

